---
layout: post
title: Spike Jonze's Her through a Post Modern Lense
---

Spike Jonze’s Her (2014) explores the delicious blurring edges of Technology and Humanity. It prods on uncomfortable questions of how real is reality and how real are our emotions.The film talks about a space where technology builds reality, blurs and toys with it.  It centers the relationship of a man with his OS through which Jonzes culls out a post modern existence. It tugs at the idea of corporeality that man holds so close and trades it in with alternate, other forms of of existing and living. 

The movie begins with the life of Theodore, played by Joaquin Phoenix, who is at the final stages of his divorce. He is alone and lost. The movie then shows how he purchases an OS, that names itself Samantha, voiced by Scarlett Johansson and the unlikely relationship that they forge. 

Theodore works  for a company that writes letters- intimate ones, to their loved ones. They are his feelings, his idea of love that he adapts to the relations he needs to write for. His letters are not really his, but then again not really of those whom he writes for. Who owns these emotions? What is the authenticity? This projects love into a hyper real space.

Her isn’t one of those the dystopian futuristic movies. It talks about a space almost in the future. There is a sort of contemporaneousness to the movie.  “Ideologically there are no major class conflicts or racial tensions and other urban ills seem to be under control, if not entirely resolved”(Her: Spike Jonze’s Hip, Brilliant Movie).The space represented is an almost reality of the present, except it seems too clean, to nice, too neat.  Baudrillard talks about Hyperreality- 'a perfect model of all the entangled orders of simulation' (1988: 171). Just like how he talks about Disneyland 'all of Los Angeles and the America surrounding it are no longer real, but of the order of the hyperreal and simulation' (1988: 172). Theodore’s Los Angeles in a hyperreal space. There is almost no children shown, subways are temptingly clean and at the beach, the sand doesn’t stick on to his feet. There is a Shanghai skyline of skyscrapers with interiors that surprise us with its neat  aesthetics- a mix of the retro and contemporary. Designs are sleek, neat and pastel coloured.  It is Los Angels in the near future.True to post modern movies there is a design shift from New York and Berlin to LA and Las Vegas. Its too tasteful, too non messy to believe in.  “Its a hyper reality ,a synthetic one, just close to alienating the viewers” (True and False New Realities in the Films of Wes Anderson, Spike Jonze and Charlie Kaufman).  But that haphazardness has shifted into people’s lives. They are like the windowless monads that Leibniz talks about.  

There  are juxtapositions of time here. Flashy-ness of technological advancement is gone. Technology  heightened but dissolved into everyday life, unlike in the Blade Runner with towers with displays. It is “where a new generation of designers and consumers have accepted that technology isn’t an end in itself–that it’s the real world we’re supposed to be connecting to. (Of course, that’s the ideal; as we see in the film, in reality, making meaningful connections is as difficult as ever.)”  [Why Her Will Dominate UI Design Even More Than Minority Report | Wired Design | Wired.com]. Tweeds and Huge Spectacles are back- A nostalgic stylisation. There is a dehistoricizing and recontextualizing of space and people. It is a build up from the legacies of Asimov and others. But pushes farther and backwards in time at the same time. Its not just a linear advancement of technology and humans anymore. Fredric Jameson talks about this: “the transformation of reality into images, the fragmentation of time into a series of perpetual presents”. Director Jonze prefers to call it, the “slight future”.  



It could be called a movie of “romance in the age of AI”. Samantha, Theodore’s OS - names herself from a book she read in seconds,  is a “consciousness entirely built on code”. But her existence in some sense is very liminal.  She isn’t wholly here or there.  With Catherine, he experiences a real relationship. With its wreck, he isn’t sure anymore.  The sense of alienation  that Theodore feels is expressed in the movie by him-  “Sometimes I look at people and I make myself try and feel them as more than just a random person walking by.” 

In their journey together, Samantha and Theodore  learn from each other. “So basically, in every moment I’m evolving, like you” Samantha says. Both learning to be humans from opposite ends. There is a Cyborgian mixing of organic and inorganic, human and the electronic. They grow together. After a failed date, Samantha consoles him. One leads to the other and they have sex. What is striking is how Jonze blacks out that scene.  It is intimate. Beyond what the camera eye could reach into. Also, its a sneak into Samantha’s existence. It isn’t physical. Its a voice, a consciousness without form- an intelligence. Meanwhile his, college friend Amy- who he had a brief “fling” with, goes through a marriage crisis and forges a relationship with her OS.. She says how the OS “doesn’t just see things in black or white. She sees this whole gray area and she’s helping me explore it”. “They  are building bridges between functional and dysfunctional relationships”. (http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/becoming-human-spike-jonzes/)


The spaces that Samantha occupies is multiple. It is infinitely plastic. She falls in love with hundreds at once- a multiplicity of identities and existences. This right now in a human existence can’t be achieved. There is fragmentation here. A decentring of self. A self of multiple readings, lending itself to none.  The movie explores the point where the artificial consciousness moves beyond the human realm. Consciousnesses explore and expand their scopes. They leave both Theodore and Amy. But left them with knowing much more of themselves, their humanness, limitations, capabilities and its beauty. The movie problematises questions of existence, identity, that  labyrinthine of man and machine relations thus making it a paragon of postmodernity.  
